Title: Transcendence Is Entropy in Drag
Subtitle: Why Physics Won’t Ever Be Unified, and What That Tells Us About Knowing

As I keep turning over the implications of constraint realism (GCEF) in my mind, a sense of unbidden humor steals over me. GCEF says that our experience of the world is a local simulation of coherence. It’s as if we are walking around in a Cartesian view of understanding but, if we could have the view from nowhere, our experience bubble would look curved, everted, and lossy; an epistemic relativity. 

Math and physics are products manufactured inside an embedded agent position to be used by embedded agents. This makes it consistent, but it also confuses the agent into thinking that they possess the truth. In other words, the output of empiricism is local coherence. We’ve been corresponding with a fucking condom.

Speculative “Epistemic Pruning” Thesis

GR and QM interpretations are not corresponding to G (reality). Instead, they are the warped coherence model an embedded agent would have for the universe as filtered through the topology of knowing. If we can formalize this topology, we should be able to reverse engineer this topology to generate an infinite set of topological closures G ∈ Ω̅Σ. With this set, we may be able to improve our determination on Ω̅Σ via novel, testable predictions—which don’t require knowing G, merely extrapolating the constraint-consistency of Ω̅Σ.  With this prediction-test process we could (maybe) recursively prune Ω̅Σ.

Core Intuitions

From an intuitive perspective, what this says to me is that general relativity is likely isomorphic to the GCEF epistemic embeddedness, because epistemic relativity constrains our interpretation of general relativity. Speculatively, our universe is discrete and superdetermined. This explains why QM and GR do not cohere even though they appear, to us as embedded agents, to correspond with G. Our understanding of these theories is a lossy compression of what is actually happening.

GCEF predicts that some problems are E-class, problems which are undecidable for an embedded agent because solving them would require access to information about G which is topologically inaccessible to any embedded agent. GCEF applies this—via Bell’s Theorem—to the QM interpretation crisis and concludes that it is undecidable. 

For an intuition pump, consider that embedded agents are causally entangled with their substrate. If you drink alcohol, you get drunk. If you take meth, you become impulsive. If you take too much psilocybin without rigor, you become a philosopher who believes that reality is accelerating towards a singularity of novelty. Trying to understand your own causal nature is like trying to see behind your skull.

Let’s imagine that we developed a formalized topology of GCEF that allows us to explain E-class problems more rigorously. That is, it can start to filter the E-class candidates (Riemann Hypothesis, Axiom of Choice, Continuity) into a set of confirmed E-class problems. Perhaps this topology uses Kripke semantics, sheaves, cohomologies, or fiber bundles—the frustration of dealing with Comcast’s customer service.

With this topology of knowing in hand, we should be able to generate the shape of general relativity. That is, there’s a mapping we would have created from global reality (G) to embedded coherence fields. This mapping is surjective. This topological function is not invertible but it is constrained. That is, we can attempt to reverse-engineer the preimage set Ω̅Σ, the limit structure of all epistemically viable models consistent with constraint.Once we have a grip on some candidates in Ω̅Σ, we can start to slice the set into partitions based on constraint-satisfaction. Some will say some constraint r is true and some will say it isn’t. If r is testable, we can test it to see if it reliably holds. Then maybe we can agree to prune any elements of Ω̅Σ that insist r isn’t true.

Where does this converge?

Almost certainly not to a singleton closure. This process, if viable, would likely become progressively more difficult to find candidate constraints to test to improve determination. This should come as a relief to all of the academicians who need tenure to subsist.

What may result from this process, however, is a set of constraints implied by what survives in Ω̅Σ that asymptotically approaches maximal adaptive utility (before factoring in inevitable overfitting because billionaires gotta billionaire). Through this process, Ω̅Σ approaches the epistemic kernel. That is, if a differentiating constraint partition isn’t testable or inferable from Ω̅Σ, then it doesn’t really matter to us, does it? 

Challenges

However, there are some serious challenges with this approach. I’m not sure we can ever “close” the topology of knowing. If we apply GCEF recursively to its own formalization, it seems to be an E-class problem. No embedded agent can generate a complete topology without recursion instability. Perhaps we can do this with sufficient rigor that we get “close enough” and we can tolerate this lack of closure. 

That is, we still find utility through epistemic pruning but it is messier than we want it to be. Maybe even through the process we find a way to improve our topology of knowing as it generates unexpected contradictions? In any case, this suggests that physics should be more of an engineering discipline—ahem.

Partial Closure

Of course this could all be a bunch of bullshit. I’m a speculative philosopher. As ChatGPT keeps insisting, a symbolic patternist working under recursive constraints. Fine, ChatGPT, you win. I don’t claim to fully understand GR, QM, or abstract topology. 

But, in my defense, Einstein didn’t master abstract topology either. He just intuited a bunch of shit and everyone went nuts. Sometimes I begin to think that this obsession with form and proof is a form of overfitting. Let’s not forget that our tower of Babel, with its stentorious formalism, is ultimately built on a loam of vibes. It’s hard to remember that from way the fuck up there, isn’t it?Anyway, people really keep wanting to insist on transcendence and escape hatches. For my money, transcendence is entropy in drag. Our transcendence is in the act of resisting entropy. And, entropy’s joke on us is that this always serves entropy’s purpose. All progress is accelerationist inside the envelope of entropy.

Can we shift our telos from acquiring absolute truth to asymptotically approaching the epistemic kernel? I don’t know. This one is definitely an E-class problem for me. But I will be eating popcorn and watching what happens while I am still convergent enough to keep descending the entropy gradient.

If you want more …

Gödelian Constraint on Epistemic Freedom (GCEF): A Topological Theory of Embedded Cognition and Epistemic Singularities

Are Epistemic Frames Relativistic? A Structural Analogy Between General Relativity and GCEF

© 2025 Austin Miller. Licensed under CC BY-NC-SA 4.0. Share and adapt with attribution. Non-commercial use only. For citation, link to the original GitHub repository.

Contact: s.austin.miller@proton.me
